Hi everyone. Welcome to this quick tutorial on doing exploratory data
analysis with R in Positron, the next-generation data science IDE built
by Posit. In this video I'll walk you through setting up a project, exploring
data using the handy Data Explorer, writing an R script for loading data
from a CSV file, then wrangling it and visualizing it, all seamlessly within
Positron. Let's get started. So here I am in a fresh Positron window and the first
thing that I am going to do is to create a new folder for my analysis. I want to
keep everything associated with this analysis in a new folder, including my
data, my scripts and so forth. So let's go ahead and click on new folder and since
I'm going to be working with R, I'm going to select our project. Let's click on
next and I am going to name this exploring deadlines. It'll be clear in a
second why we're naming this. I could choose a different location to save this
but I'm just going to leave it in my user directory and let's click on next.
And here you can see that I can choose different versions of R, any other
version that I might have installed on my system. I'm going to leave this at the
release version of R and say create. And Positron asks me whether I would like to
open this in new Positron session or the current window since there's nothing
else going on in my current window. Let's go ahead and select current window here.
And here we are. I have a Positron folder. I can see the name of that here in my
folder selector and also if I go to my primary sidebar I can see I have no
files in here right now. With these actions what Positron did for me is, if I
scroll over to my finder, created a new folder in my user directory called
exploring deadlines. Let's go ahead now and figure out what data set we are
going to use. We're going to use a data set from this paper is on the impact of
homework deadline times on college student performance and stress and it
discusses an experiment in a business statistics course where different
sections are randomly assigned a 4 p.m. or an 11 59 p.m. homework deadline and
then asked about their stress level associated with deadlines. The
researchers also compared learning outcomes of the two groups as well. And
when they published the paper they published their data too. So let's click
on the supplemental material allows me to download the data set. Then I can go
ahead and locate this data set in my finder. Let's go to my downloads and I
will go ahead and copy this CSV file and go back over to Positron. To keep things
organized I am going to create a new folder. I will call it data and then I
can simply paste my data set into in the Positron window. It says are you sure you
want to paste? Yes, let's go ahead and say paste. And I can see that it places the
CSV file in my data folder and pops open the Data Explorer for me. On the left is
my summary panel which gives me a high-level overview of all the variables
in my data set and if I click on them I can get some numerical summaries on them
as well. And on the right I can see my data grid where I can see each of my
variables in a spreadsheet format and my observations in rows. I can also see the
variable types in this view as well. I can go ahead and collapse the summary
panel if I want to take more real estate from my data grid and I can also open
this file as a plain text file if I want to inspect it as a CSV as well. But
instead of doing that we are going to go ahead and load this data into R. So I'm
going to go back to the root of my exploring deadlines folder and I can do
a few things. I can I want to create a new file so one way that I can do that
is using the new file icon here or is to use the command palette which I can open
with command shift P and then I can open a new R file. I'm going to go ahead and
save this file as code.R as I'm not feeling very inspired with a different
file name. Let's go ahead and load our packages. I will use the tidyverse
package for this analysis and whenever I'm working with a data set with non
snake case variable names I like using the janitor package as well for the
clean names function. Let's load our data. I will call this homework raw to begin
with and we will read these data from our data folder. I am tabbing to find the
folders in my current the subfolders in my current folder and let's go ahead and
load these data. Load our packages first and then our data and I can see that my
data is now in this session tab under data and I can go ahead and double click
on this to pop it back open in my data viewer. Let's go ahead and collapse the
summary panel and take a look at our data one more time. I can see the number
of rows and columns reflected here so if I had read the paper I would be able to
check to see if this these numbers actually sound right and before I get to
even writing some code to explore the data I can start looking at it using my
data viewer as well. For example if I want to see the data organized based on
whether the deadline was at midnight or not so 0 indicating a 4 p.m. deadline 1
indicating midnight or 11 59 deadline I can click on the three dots here and say
I want to sort these data in ascending or descending order or if I am done
viewing this data in this manner I can go ahead and say clear sorting. I can
also sort based on multiple variables as well so let's go ahead and first sort
ascending based on midnight deadline and then sort descending based on fall
semester for example. I'm going to clear these one more time. Additionally we can
use the data viewer to filter the data as well so let's go ahead and add a
filter for midnight deadline and I am going to say I'm looking for a midnight
deadline is equal to 1 by the filter so this shows me that there are 42
observations where the midnight deadline was 1 so this must be the 42 students
who were randomly assigned to the section that had a midnight deadline and
let's go ahead and add another filter. Let's say I want to look at year in
school add another filter and this time let's use a different condition is
greater than or equal to 3 so we're looking at juniors or seniors here and
once again at the bottom I can see that now we're down to 13 rows or 13 students
who meet these two criteria. Now another cool thing that I can do is now that I
have these 13 students selected say I want to share these data in some other
way quickly with a collaborator I could go ahead and copy their data. I'll go
ahead and copy and say go to something like Excel and paste just these 13 rows
so I am able to copy from my data viewer into an Excel file. Obviously this is the
kind of thing I would prefer to write code for for a reproducible data
analysis but it's pretty neat that Positron allows me to do these quick
things without having to actually write some code to export the data as well. Now
that I'm done looking at these 13 cases I can clear the filters either one at a
time by axing out of each of the conditions or I can go ahead and clear
all filters at once. Now let's go ahead and write some code. I want to do a
little bit of data prep so I will start with my homework row object and the
first thing that I'm going to do is to clean the name so that each of the
variables is now in snake case so I can take a look at the result in my console
quickly. There are a couple of variables that I'm going to work with one of which
is the midnight deadline variable and we can see that it's coded as a 0 or 1 but
I'd like to actually use informative labels for its level so let's go ahead
and mutate and create new variable called deadline and write an if-else
condition if midnight deadline is equal to 1 we're going to call this midnight
otherwise we're going to call it 4 p.m. and I'll place this variable after the
ID variable since it's one that I want to be available to me every time I'm
looking at the data and here we go. The other variable that I'll work closely
with is the stress variable so let's go ahead and relocate that that's the q3
deadline stress to be after my deadline variable as well and let's go ahead and
save this cleaned up data as homework that I can use for the remainder of my
analysis. I have the same number of rows in my raw data and my cleaned up data
and this one additional column where a deadline it has the levels 4 p.m. and
midnight. The next thing I might want to do is to compare these two groups so
compare deadline groups stress levels. I'm gonna do a numerical summary first
so let's go ahead and say I want to group by the new deadline variable and
do something like summarize mean stress level so I can tab to find the variables
that start with a particular string so this is q3 deadline stress and if I run
this code I'm getting an NA for my midnight group I bet this is because
there must be an NA in my and an observation in the midnight group that
didn't respond to the deadline stress question on the survey. Since this is the
only data that I'm going to be working with for this quick tour I'm going to go
ahead and redo my homework data frame to filter for any rows where the q3
deadline stress variable is not NA so that I can be left with it seems like
there was only one observation where we had an NA and let's go ahead and do this.
My quick analysis suggests results that match up with the author's conclusions
that students in the midnight group are less stressed on average that's not what
these numbers say 298 versus 265 but the scale is that 1 indicates that the
deadline made it much more stressful and 5 indicates that the deadline made it
much better. Now a better way of looking at this could be a visualization so
let's go ahead and do that as well. I'll add plot I'm going to use ggplot to
make this so the data frame is homework and I would like to create a ggplot
where on the x-axis I have my deadline variable and then I want to fill by the
categories of deadline stress variable and I would like to make a geom bar.
ggplot2 needs this variable to be a factor so let's say as factor here in
order to be able to fill by it and since we've removed one observation from the
data set my two groups are not of equal size so I'm going to go ahead and say
position fill in order to make this a bar plot where the segments represent
the proportions of students that fall into each category each fill category.
Let's try to make this plot a little bit more easier to interpret so I'm going to
add some labels on the x-axis this is about the deadline and on the y-axis
we're actually looking at a proportion my favorite theme is the minimal in ggplot
so I'm going to add that quickly as well and the next thing that I want to do is
I want to add some informative labels to this legend because with funny variable
name and my legend name as well as a scale where it's not clear what one
means versus five means the visualization is not that meaningful to
me. How am I going to do this? First let's go ahead and change the color scheme
from something from the default to a gradient color scheme so I'm going to
use scale fill variadis D for this a discrete color scheme remember I said
that one indicates that the deadline made it much worse and five indicates
that it made it much better so I'd like to go ahead and reverse the scale as
well and then reverse the color scale as well so so far I have been able to rely
on my ggplot2 knowledge to make these changes however I want to label the
levels I want to give them meaningful text so that anyone looking at this
visualization can easily tell what each one of these levels mean and frankly I
don't remember how to do that. I can of course use the question mark command to
go to my help so I can do a question mark scale fill variadis D which will
pop open the help view here but let's think of another way that positron can
help us with it. Help for now and let's go to my command palette with command
shift P and I will look at my help options and I can see that there's an
option called show help at cursor and I'll take a note of the fact that I can
also get to this with the f1 keyboard shortcut in the future so let's go ahead
and select this and what this does is wherever my cursor is if I do f1 it will
show me the help for the function that is where my cursor is so let's go ahead
and open up the help for scale fill variadis again and take a look at some
of the options that I might have so I think this dot dot dot might be helpful
for me so let's scroll down and see what other arguments we can pass on to a
discrete scale and some of the ones that are going to be useful for me are
things like labels for example. I'm also not a huge fan of the default color
scale for variadis so I'm going to change my option to be E one that I like
a little bit better so the five yellow indicates that deadline made it much
better and the one dark blue indicates that deadline made it much worse in
terms of stress. Let's go ahead and get those words on here I will say that I
want labels and I want to create a vector and in this vector let's go ahead
and copy from the data dictionary I had saved in another window here and here's
my data dictionary I can use the multi cursor with option shift and do a multi
selector here and let's say let's put some quotes around these say these are
equal to these explanations and commas and I'll just get rid of the last comma
let's see if this actually does what I wanted to do and in fact my legend is
looking a lot better we're gonna go ahead and add a better title for this
legend as well so this is for the fill scale and here is the survey question
from the from the start from the study that's a really long text so let's go
ahead and wrap this for 20 characters at a time maybe and things are starting
to look a lot better now let's go ahead and add a title for this plot as well
something like stress level versus deadline and things are starting to look
a little squished in our plot you can see that I can scroll back to my
plotting history to see where things started to look not so right I can also
clear certain items from my plotting history if I know that I'm not going to
need them by simply Xing out of them go ahead and run this code one more time
and I can also if things are starting to look squished open this plot in an
editor tab for example so it looks like if I was to size things correctly that
overlapping text is not going to happen I can go ahead and change how this plot
is shown in the plot viewer perhaps pick different sizes for it or give it a
custom size myself but without even needing to worry about custom size I was
able to find a size that seems to not overlap the text so things are looking a
lot better with my plot but my code is a little bit all over the place in terms
of formatting I could manually go ahead and add line breaks and tabs and whatnot
but instead I can use air to format my code so let's go ahead and go to our
command palette with command shift P and then say air and we want to format the
workspace folder it says we need to save our code before we can do that I'm gonna
say yes to that and you can see that it has made a bunch of changes to my code
not to the text in my code but for the formatting of my code I had to do this
manually here but going forward I can actually ask positron to do this for me
every time I save my code so let's go back to our command palette one more
time and this time I want to set some user settings in the user settings JSON
file which is how positron saves your user settings you can see that I
already have a few settings for myself here and I'm going to add a new one for
R which will say that we want to use air as our default formatter and we want
to format on save each time so let's go ahead and save this I don't need a
restart or anything of positron and let's go back to our code and let's
finish things up by adding a caption so for this caption I am going to go back
to my paper and say that I want to cite this article let's go ahead and copy
this citation to the clipboard and give this a try it is there but it's all
squished we're probably going to need to do this STR wrap trick one more time to
wrap our text I will try something like a hundred characters for this one and
that's starting to look good but I'm going to need to move it so that it is
not it's aligned properly at the bottom and in order to do that I need to add
some theme settings I personally never remember all of the theme settings
available in positron so I will do f1 to open up the help for a theme within
theme I can go ahead and search for anything related to caption so I can do
plot caption and plot caption position so the plot caption position is panel by
default but I could try plot as well let's see if that helps me that does
seem to help me a little bit but things are again looking quite squished so
let's go back to our help and it looks like for plot caption I can give it an
element text so let's try that too and let's give it a horizontal justification
of zero so that is looking a lot better let's give this plot a little bit more
room to breathe so that we can actually see all of its contents and click on the
copy plot to clipboard button here go to my email and go ahead and plop it in
there and that's a quick intro to positron for exploratory data analysis
with our from project setup and data exploration to writing scripts and
making plots positron is packed with thoughtful features to support your data
exploration workflows